With the recent Black Lives Matter movement, galvanized by the high-profile fatal encounters between black Americans and the police, we believe it is essential to see whether this visible discrimination spreads further into the Criminal Justice System in the US. This is not a new phenomenon, as ‘[r]acial and ethnic disparities in incarceration have been well documented in many Western nations’ (Sentencing Project) and a number of scholars argue that mass incarceration in the US ‘cannot be understood in isolation from the history of African Americans over several centuries’ (Sentencing Project). 

There have also been Black Lives Matter demonstrations in the UK, with some protestors drawing parallels between the death of George Floyd in the US and instances of racism in the UK. Following these marches, Boris Johnson announced an inquiry into racial inequality but faced criticism for saying the UK is ‘not a racist country’ (Woodcock, 2020). Therefore, our research will analyse arrest and incarceration rates in the UK as well in order to provide a comparison between the two countries. 

The Black Lives Matter movement initially sparked our interest in whether the criminal justice system treated black and white people differently, however, we also wanted to explore this with regards to other ethnicities and races (which ones??) in order to provide a more in depth understanding. 

According to the UK Criminal Justice System, its primary purpose is ‘to deliver justice for all, by convicting and punishing the guilty and helping them to stop offending, while protecting the innocent’ (Criminal Justice System). Therefore, the recognition and removal of any systematic discrimination is critical as if discrimination is rooted within the Criminal Justice System, it cannot be said to be fullfilling its purpose sufficiently. 

To get a general overview we will be focusing on the arrest and incarceration rates and whether different races and ethnicities are disproportionately represented in the Criminal Justice Systems in comparison to the general population.

